# Billberg's _Synopsis Faunae Scandinaviae_

[Gustaf Johan Billberg](/h/73658) (1772–1844) was primarily a botanist, but also
produced a _Synopsis Faunæ Scandinaviæ_ in the 1820s, which introduced a number of new
names for mammals. There are some problems with this work but I do not have enough
available information to sort them out completely, so this document only sets out what I
do know.

Names published in this work are variously cited as either 1827 or 1828. I have found
evidence that different editions were published in both years, with at least some
differences in the text.

The work was divided into various parts. I have found evidence of only two, but perhaps
more were published:

- "Tom. I. Pars 1. Mammalia", discussed below
- "Tom. I. Pars 2. Aves", available
  [on BHL](https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/137828). Mathews and Iredale
  published [a discussion](https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/page/34804601) of this
  work (_Austral Avian Record_ 2(2-3):33, 1913).

I found both the 1827 and 1828 editions online:

- [1827 edition](/a/67228), available online at
  [Google Books](https://books.google.com/books?id=g3AFAAAAQAAJ) and
  [Europeana.eu](https://www.europeana.eu/en/item/9200143/BibliographicResource_2000069314128)
  (both provide the same scan). The title page bears the year 1827 and cites the
  publisher as "Ex officina typogr. Ordinum Equestrium" (i.e., from the publishing
  office of the knightly orders). Europeana's metadata cites the publisher as "Ex
  officina typogr. Caroli Deleen" and the year as 1828, but this does not match the
  volume itself.
- [1828 edition](/a/67230), available online at
  [Rhino Resource Center](http://www.rhinoresourcecenter.com/index.php?s=1&act=refs&CODE=ref_detail&id=1165234971).
  The title page looks similar, but with various typographical differences; the year is
  1828 and the publisher is "Ex officina typogr. Caroli Deleen".

The scan of the 1827 edition is incomplete, missing pages 12–13, 16–17, 34–35. The book
contains various foldouts setting out Billberg's classification of mammals, and those
are not fully visible in the scan; only a few pieces can be seen. There is a preface
(pages i through viii) dated 15 September 1827.

The scan of the 1828 edition includes only the title pages and the foldouts with
Billberg's classification, not the body of the book.

There is enough overlap to show that the text of the 1827 and 1828 editions does not
match fully. Both scans show the order Dichirina as part of the conspectus, followed by
two lines of description, but the text does not match. Similarly, for the next order,
Tetrachirina, the text does not match. The name of the subclass in which Billberg
includes ungulates is also visible in both scans, but it is spelled "Hoplepodia" in 1827
and "Hoplepoda" in 1828.

## External evidence

- Woodward, B.B. 1903. Catalogue of the Books, Manuscripts, Maps and Drawings in the
  British Museum (Natural History). Vol. I. A–D. Printed by Order of the Trustees,
  London, 500 pp.
  - p. 163: "Billberg (G. J.) Synopsis Faunæ Scandinaviæ. Tom. I, pt. 1. Mammalia. pp.
    viii, 55, xiii, 5 tabs. 6o. Holmiæ, 1827."
- Sherborn, C.D. 1922. Index animalium sive index nominum quae ab A.D. MDCCLVIII
  generibus et speciebus animalium imposita sunt. Part I. Introduction, bibliography and
  index A-Aff. Printed by order of the Trustees of the British Museum, London, 128 pp.
  - p. xxiv: "Syn. Faun. Scand. Pt. I, Mamm. 8vo. Holm. 1827; ed. 2 in R. S. 1828 with
    many changes."

## Treatment in the database

While both the 1827 and 1828 editions were apparently published, the 1827 edition is
older and I have a more nearly complete copy, so I cite names only from the 1827
edition.
