# Hemprich and Ehrenberg's _Symbolae Physicae_

This work arose out of a voyage to the Near East by two Prussian naturalists, Christian
Gottfried Ehrenberg (1795–1876) and Friedrich Wilhelm Hemprich (1796–1825). They arrived
in Egypt in 1821 and traveled around northeastern Africa and southwestern Asia until
1825, when Hemprich died in what is now Eritrea and Ehrenberg returned to Europe (Baker,
1997){Animalia-Hemprich Ehrenberg travel (Baker 1997).pdf}. Ehrenberg then published an
account of their collections, entitled _Symbolae physicae_.

## Internal evidence

The mammals were issued in two "decades" or volumes. {Mammalia NE Africa (Hemprich &
Ehrenberg 1).pdf} is the first volume. It bears the cover date 1828, but contains a
letter dated 12 April 1829, where Ehrenberg writes that he is about to go on a
collecting trip to Russia, so he is having the work published as much as possible before
he leaves. The work also contains a dedicated dated September 1828 and a preface dated
October 1828. The main text is a series of chapters dealing with individual species,
some of which contain a date at the end. The last date is August 1832. Before the first
page of signature _i_ is an explanation from Ehrenberg, stating that he is having the
rest of the text of Decas I published together with Decas I. There are also 10 plates.
The closing wrapper bears an index listing the 10 plates.

The second volume is {Mammalia NE Africa (Hemprich & Ehrenberg 2).pdf}. The title page
bears the date 1830. There is no preface or introductory material. The end of the second
account (for _Herpestes leucurus_) is dated September 1832, and the date at the end of
the last account is November 1832. There are again 10 plates and an index on the closing
wrapper.

The dates at the ends of individual accounts presumably represent the date when
Ehrenberg wrote the text, not necessarily when they were published. It is clear that the
cover dates (1828 and 1830) are not correct for the entire contents of the volumes.

There is no pagiation in the work. In the text of the mammal accounts, the footer of
every second page contains a small-print signature, ranging from a to z and then further
from aa, which is conventionally used for citations.

## External evidence

{Library-BMNH catalog 2.pdf} p. 515 writes "Mammalia. By C. G. Ehrenberg. Dec. I & II.
20 pls., col., with descriptive letterpress. 1828, 30. [Published:—Text, dec. 1, sig.
a-f and pls. I-X in 1828; the remainder of dec. 1 and the whole of dec. II in 1833.]"

Contemporary evidence for Decas I:

- [Isis, 1829](https://www.google.com/books/edition/Isis/s2NEAAAAcAAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1&pg=PA713&printsec=frontcover)
  pp. 713–714 reviews the work, giving the date 1828. What was published is the text of
  _Ursus syriacus_ and _Hyrax syriacus_, plus 10 plates.
- [Zeitung für die elegante Welt, 18 August 1829](https://www.google.com/books/edition/Zeitung_f%C3%BCr_die_elegante_Welt/keU-AAAAYAAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=symbolae%20physicae&pg=PA1359-IA2&printsec=frontcover):
  notice of part I
- [Allgemeines Repertorium der neuesten in- und ausländischen Litteratur, 1829](https://www.google.com/books/edition/Allgemeines_Repertorium_der_neuesten_in/R_PUkd-BVyoC?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=symbolae%20physicae&pg=RA5-PA9&printsec=frontcover):
  similar notice
- [Freimüthiges Abendblatt, August 1829](https://www.google.com/books/edition/Freimuethiges_Abendblatt/k7YDUOq0I2MC?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=symbolae%20physicae&pg=PT49&printsec=frontcover)
- [Verzeichniß der Bücher, Landkarten &c. welche vom Januar bis Juny 1829 neu erschienen oder neu aufgelegt worden sind](https://www.google.com/books/edition/Halbjahrsverzeichnis_der_neuerscheinunge/i-Qrbl-I2uYC?hl=en&gbpv=1&pg=RA2-PA39&printsec=frontcover&dq=symbolae%20physicae)

While the date of 1828 is provided by the _Isis_ review, I found no mention of the work
from 1828.

For the second Decas, a date in early 1833 is supported by
[Verzeichniß der Bücher, Landkarten &c. welche vom Januar bis Juny 1833 neu erschienen oder neu aufgelegt worden sind](https://www.google.com/books/edition/Halbjahrsverzeichnis_der_neuerscheinunge/T2BrkW3J5pIC?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=symbolae%20physicae&pg=PA51&printsec=frontcover).

## Authorship

Names from the _Symbolae Physicae_ are usually attributed to both Hemprich and
Ehrenberg, but as Hemprich died before the expedition's return to Europe, the published
work was produced by Ehrenberg alone. Thus, Ehrenberg is the sole author of the
_Symbolae Physicae_ (except for the insect portion by Klug; Baker, 1997) and of the
names introduced in the work.

## Conclusion

The contemporary evidence (e.g., the _Isis_ review) confirms that the mammal portion of
the _Symbolae Physicae_ was published in two parts.

The first contained all of the plates in Decas I, as well as some of the text.
{Library-BMNH catalog 2.pdf} attributes only signatures a through f to this part, but it
seems more likely that signatures g and h, which also deal with hyraxes and are
associated with the second plate, were included, since they precede the notice where
Ehrenberg explained the delay in the publication of the rest of the text. {Library-BMNH
catalog 2.pdf} and the title page attribute this part of the work to 1828, but
contemporary evidence (e.g., the _Verzeichniß der Bücher_) suggests it was published in
1829, no later than June.

The second part contained the remaining text of Decas I and all of Decas II, which were
apparently published together. {Library-BMNH catalog 2.pdf} dates these to 1833,
consistent with the evidence of the _Verzeichniß der Bücher_.
